## 4 Confidentiality/Ethics

### R4. The repository ensures, to the extent possible, that data are created, curated, accessed, and used in compliance with disciplinary and ethical norms. 

The Meertens Institute feels a great responsibility regarding disciplinary norms, ethical and legal issues. All of our data holdings are exclusively stored in Dutch data centers and are subject to Dutch national regulations and laws. For our
disciplinary field protection of personal data, for example gathered through questionnaires or language related studies, is of primary importance. Our current procedures concerning confidentiality and ethical issues largely focus on proper management of personal data protection. Cases that are beyond the scope of current procedures will be separately evaluated by the management team of the Meertens Institute. Processing of personal data in the Netherlands is bound by legal frameworks, more specifically the Wet bescherming persoonsgegevens (Wbp). The Wbp, which dates back to 2001, is the Dutch version of the 1995 European Personnel Directive (No. 95/46 / EC). Each European Member State has drawn up its own privacy act based on this directive. This means that privacy laws in the different European countries are not completely equal. To align the differences, a European privacy regulation has been developed. This General Data Protection Regulation (AVG) was adopted in May 2016 and will apply from 25 May 2018. From that moment on, a single privacy regime applies throughout the European Union. The Netherlands already knows the Datalekken Meldplicht Act, which generally knows the same provisions as the AVG (http://www.justitia.nl/privacy/). The Wbp contains rules for the processing of personal data, with the emphasis on the automated processing of personal data. The most important provisions of the Wbp on the lawful handling of personal data are summarized as follows:
“Personal data may only be processed in accordance with the law and in a proper and careful manner. Personal data may only be collected for specific, pre-explicit and justified purposes. And then only processed further for purposes that are compatible with it. 
The person whose personal data is processed (the person concerned) must be aware of the identity of the organization or person who processes such personal data (the so-called responsible) and the purpose of data processing. The data processing must be adequately protected. For special data, such as race, health and belief, additional strict rules apply.”
The Wbp has a number of exemptions from reporting personal data. One of these exemptions concerns the processing of personal data by scientific research organizations which are solely for the benefit of research or research carried out by them. These organizations do not need to report this processing if certain conditions are met. To check whether the processing of personal data for a particular investigation must be reported the Code of Conduct for Use of Personal Data in Scientific Research, contains a checklist of five questions which should be answered with an unequivocal "yes" or "no". Every researcher associated with the Meertens Institute and third parties wishing to deposit data to our repository are expected to comply with these rules of conduct, and therefore collection management can check and take the appropriate steps to follow the Code of Conduct. This checklist is listed below:

1. Does the processing take place by an organization for scientific research which is solely for the benefit of research or research carried out by this organization (hereinafter referred to as "organization")? 
2. Is processing only necessary for collecting, processing and checking the data for a particular research project?
3. Does the processing only apply to the following personal data: 
  1. Name, first names, initials, title, gender, date of birth, address, postal code, place of residence, telephone number and similar information required for communication (for example, the e-mail address) and the bank's and bank account number of the person concerned; 
  2. A non traceable administrative number 
  3. Other than the above summarized data obtained for a particular investigation?
  4. Does the organization provide the personal data to: 
     1. Those including third parties who: 
        i.   - are in charge of the activities listed above in question 2; Or 
        ii.  - administer the work listed above in question 2; Or 
        iii. - are necessarily involved in the activities listed above in question 2? 
     2. Others, if: 
        i.   - the person has granted unambiguous consent for data processing; 
        ii.  - data processing is necessary for compliance with a statutory duty by the scientific research organization;
        iii. - data processing is necessary because of the vital importance of the data subject (for example an urgent medical need) or 
        iv.  - data is processed further for historical, statistical or scientific purposes? AND 
        v.     Does the organization ensure that data is processed for these specific purposes only? 
 5. Does the organization remove the personal data referred to in point a of question 3 (excluding sex, place of residence and date of birth) no later than six months after the other data on the person concerned referred to in point c of question 3 has been obtained?

If one or more of these 5 questions is answered with ‘yes’ then processing of personal data is to be reported to the College Bescherming Persoonsgegevens. While these considerations apply to the use of personal data in any research project, this checklist is also applied to all  data depositions at the Meertens Institute. The collection manager at the Meertens Institute will evaluate each submission and may advise depositors on any data protection matters. In cases where data protection is to be considered the management of the Meertens Institute will decide upon the necessity to create specialized repository facilities and additional procedures to safeguard this data, or request the depositor to deposit their data in a manner which is compliant with above regulations. Any data containing personal data that cannot be anonymized and for which no specialized handling procedures are considered necessary will be placed under embargo restrictions in our repository. Anyone wishing to access this material must make a well motivated request to our collections manager. Approval of such a request is subject to approval by the management of the Meertens Institute. In case of a dispute the Meertens Institute maintains a complaint procedure. If digital provision of certain data infringes any rights or damage to (privacy) interests, these may be expressed directly to the Meertens Institute. The procedures for submitting a complaint are explained on our website (http://www.meertens.knaw.nl/ndb/disclaimer.php). In case of a substantiated complaint, the Meertens Institute will make the material inaccessible and / or remove it from the website or will strive to come to an agreeable solution. In addition, a person may contact the College Bescherming Persoonsgegevens directly with a request for mediation in case personal data protection interests are infringed. If access to restricted data is requested, the data owner (if not the Meertens Institute) is contacted and has to decide about granting access to the requestor and under what conditions. When in doubt, the management team of the Meertens Institute decides all requests for access to closed data. It currently consists of the institute’s scientific director, the administration director and three senior scientists and is considered to have authority and access to sufficient expertise to handle any disputes. The management team will naturally respect all legal requirements pertaining to handling personal data and IPR restrictions and abide by rulings from relevant legal institutions e.g. College Bescherming Persoonsgegevens. 
A more high level description of the privacy policy of the KNAW institutes, including the Meertens Institute, can be found at https://www.knaw.nl/en/privacy
